Observables is really the combination
of two classic patterns so
before we're talking about what
I call the reducer pattern.
Now we're talking about observables,
which is the combination of two
classic gang of four style patterns,
which is the iterate pattern and
the observer pattern.
And so, the observer pattern gives
you the ability to communicate
that some event has happened
at some indeterminate time.
And so this is a way for
like I'm going to observe this and
you tell me when This is ready.
So a lot of times I think of this as
if you've ever went out to dinner and
you go in and say, I have a table,
I need a table for four.
They're like, it's not ready,
but here is a beeper or
a pager and they give it to you and
then you walk away.
Well, that is kind of how that works and
so
it works a little better when
you're talking about promises.
But that is the idea is that something's
going to happen in the future you wanna
know about it, and so you're observing it.
Then the iterator pattern allows you
to reliably access state or
data with in a collection.
And so
when you combine these two together,
it allows you to communicate
state over time Lo and
behold flow control problem solved.
And so how this works is that
you have the stream of time and
you have these events that happened.
And as these events happen,
they're communicated through
the observable stream.
And so
we are somewhat familiar with getting
values over time and
the big one being promises so
most developers have used a promise.
And this is this is probably
a better analogy for
a beber at a restaurant
that your table is ready.
But it's an asynchronous
resolution of a value and
the problem with that is is that,
well not the problem.
But the limitations of that
is that it is a single
resolution is once you
resolve a promise that is
all it will ever be the difference is the,
Observable or an observable will
emit multiple values over time
as new data is available,
you will continue to receive that.
So a really good example
of that is I think if you
are watching like a real time score board.
As the score is incremented,
you know about immediately.
The difference is that functions
enumerable that they are synchronous.
But what we really care
about is asynchronous so
promises are single resolution observables
allow for multiple resolution.
Now, one thing that's
interesting about this
is think about how we consume
the values from a promise
observable versus a function or
an enumerable.
Well, when you consume
a value from a function,
you're essentially
pulling that data to you.
When you consume a promise or
an observable,
when that promise or
observable resolves or
has a like a next integration in
it is pushing that value to you.
And so I really want us to stop and
think for just a second just mentally.
Just make that note of like, when we
call functions are pulling data to us.
But when we're dealing with
observables and by extension or
we'll deal with promises and by extension
observables data is being pushed to us.
And so I've set the stage but anytime I
start talking about observables typically
the response is usually
something like this.
And I just coolly, calmly collectively
just take a drink of my water,
And I say well, You're probably right,
you are mostly right, but,
i would say observables are challenging.
But, where I believe
people get into trouble or
in the weeds, is that they confuse.
Observables with in this case are xjs and
that 250 operators that
that project ships with.
And so just the sheer number
of operators that come with
that is like what does zip do?
Flat map like all these different I mean
they're even changing like I certainly
don't know them all is that
observables are challenging.
But when you separate
all of the operators and
you focus on just the observable stream,
suddenly this becomes a much
more viable proposition.
And again, reducing complexity
is that we're going to take
all the operators aside.
And let's focus on the observable
stream because when we
understand the observable stream,
then the stage is set.
For us to put this back together in a way
that allows us to build fully reactive,
asynchronous high
performance applications.
But we can't do that until
we understand what and
how an observable stream works.
And so
I'm going to ask you to make a small
paradigm shift this is all it takes.
We are used to thinking and by default,
we think of programming
in these terms input and
output I mean,
I even own a few .io domains.
It's just part of my brand
image at this point,
like we think of it just in programming is
I give you some input, I get some output.
But how does that work, well,
it's a function call and
we're pulling data to us.
This is how we think about programming
is that if I need something,
I'm gonna ask for it.
If I need something I'm gonna ask and
eventually you're going to give it to me.
In order to make sense
of observable streams,
I just need you to go from
this to this that's it.
Just flip the paradigm from input to
output to output to input and
what I mean by that is with anything.
You have this basic sequence
that looks like this.
You have, an initial output and
a final input.
So we've inverted this but
what that means is that
you have an event that is
producing an initial output.
It's happening and it's pushing it to you,
it's delivering it to you, it's streaming
to you, everything is a stream, especially
if we're talking about DOM events.
What we have to decide is where do
we wanna put it in our application,
and what is the final form
that we need it to be in?
So, we have initial output,
final input and
then in the middle,
we've got this magic sandwich.
So what this looks like
is you have an event,
you have a subscribe block.
So that's the event is we're
getting on this train,
the subscribe block is
we're at our destination.
And then the middle magic portion of
the sandwich are just the operators and
so let's look at a very,
very basic sequence.
And so this is in angular,
don't let that get in the way,
we could easily do this without.
But when you're dealing with DOM,
it's nice to have some framework
to help smooth that out.
But anytime that I'm dealing
with an observable stream,
the exercise that I go through is this.
Where is the initial output?
Where is the final input?
And what's happening in between?
And that's how I process every
single observable stream.
But the first thing that
I do every single time
is I figure out what
the initial output is.
And so in this case, if we look at this,
this is the initial output.
We're saying get this button,
and when it clicks,
communicate that down the stream.
Initial output and
then we have our final input.
So the subscribe block, essentially
terminates or finalizes the stream,
you cannot modify the data within
the stream at any point after that,
because it's been delivered.
And so now you're saying this is where
I want to input it into my application,
and this is the shape that I want it.
Then what you can do is assemble
yourself a nice Dagwood sandwich.
And that you can say I want
to take this event and
I want to map it to something else so
when life gives you lemons,
you just map it to lemonade.
So somebody could just make
an Inspirational poster out of that I
approve of it.
But all we're doing is saying I don't like
this I don't like your lemons I'm mapping
it to lemonade.
And then you can start to stack
them because your methods and
your operators are pure immutable
functions with no side effects.
Which means that you take a data
structure, you pass it in,
you get a new data structure.
It goes into the next thing,
into the next thing,
until it comes out the bottom.
And so at a high level this is
the basic observable string.
You have your initial output,
your final input, and
then any number of things
that can happen in between.